MR. PRESIDENT: Good morning.
Over the last three months,
my Administration has taken
aggressive action to confront
an historic economic crisis.
As we do everything that we
can to create jobs and get our
economy moving, we're also
building a new foundation for
lasting prosperity - a
foundation that invests in
quality education, lowers health
care costs, and develops new
sources of energy powered
by new jobs and industries.
One of the pillars of that
foundation must be fiscal discipline.
We came into office facing a
budget deficit of $1.3 trillion
for this year alone, and the
cost of confronting our economic crisis is high.
But we cannot settle for a
future of rising deficits and
debts that our
children cannot pay.
All across America, families
are tightening their belts and making hard choices.
Now, Washington must show that
same sense of responsibility.
That is why we have identified
two trillion dollars in
deficit-reductions over the
next decade, while taking on the
special interest spending that
doesn't advance the peoples' interests.
But we must also recognize that
we cannot meet the challenges of
today with old habits
and stale thinking.
So much of our government was
built to deal with different
challenges from a different era.
Too often, the result is
wasteful spending, bloated
programs, and
inefficient results.
It's time to fundamentally
change the way that we do
business in Washington.
To help build a new foundation
for the 21st century, we need to
reform our government so that
it is more efficient, more
transparent, and more creative.
That will demand new
thinking and a new sense of
responsibility for every
dollar that is spent.
Earlier this week, I held my
first Cabinet meeting and sent a
clear message: cut
what doesn't work.
Already, we've identified
substantial savings.
And in the days and weeks ahead,
we will continue going through
the budget line by line, and
we'll identify more than 100
programs that will
be cut or eliminated.
But we can't stop there.
We need to go further, and
we need an all-hands-on-deck
approach to
reforming government.
That's why I'm announcing
several steps that my
Administration will take in the
weeks ahead to restore fiscal
discipline while making
our government work better.
First, we need to adhere to the
basic principle that new tax or
entitlement policies
should be paid for.
This principle - known as
PAYGO - helped transform large
deficits into
surpluses in the 1990s.
Now, we must restore that
sense of fiscal discipline.
That's why I'm calling
on Congress to pass PAYGO
legislation like a bill
that will be introduced by
Congressman Baron Hill, so that
government acts the same way any
responsible family does
in setting its budget.
Second, we'll create new
incentives to reduce wasteful
spending and to
invest in what works.
We don't want agencies to
protect bloated budgets - we
want them to promote
effective programs.
So the idea is simple: agencies
that identify savings will get
to keep a portion of those
savings to invest in programs that work.
The result will be a smaller
budget, and a more effective government.
Third, we'll look for
ideas from the bottom up.
After all, Americans across the
country know that the best ideas
often come from workers
- not just management.
That's why we'll establish a
process through which every
government worker can submit
their ideas for how their agency
can save money and
perform better.
We'll put the suggestions
that work into practice.
And later this year, I will meet
with those who come up with the
best ideas to hear firsthand
about how they would make your
government more
efficient and effective.
And finally, we will reach
beyond the halls of government.
Many businesses have innovative
ways of using technology to save
money, and many experts have new
ideas to make government work more efficiently.
Government can - and
must - learn from them.
So later this year, we will host
a forum on reforming government
for the 21st century, so that
we're also guided by voices that come from outside of Washington.
We cannot sustain deficits that
mortgage our children's future,
nor tolerate wasteful
inefficiency.
Government has a responsibility
to spend the peoples' money
wisely, and to serve
the people effectively.
I will work every single day
that I am President to live up
to that responsibility, and to
transform our government so that
is held to a higher standard
of performance on behalf of the American people.
Thank you.